The latest version of the OWL ontology of PAV is always available from the *PAV namespace*:

|| *Namespace* / *OWL* || *Documentation* ||
|| http://purl.org/pav/ || http://purl.org/pav/html ||

*Current version* (v2.2):

|| *Namespace* || *versionIRI* / *OWL* || *Documentation* ||
|| http://purl.org/pav/ || http://purl.org/pav/2.2 || http://purl.org/pav/2.2/html ||

== Versioning ===

PAV follows the [http://semver.org/ Semantic versioning] rules. In particular, for say v2.1.0, we consider that:
 * The _major_ number (2.x.x) will increase if a change is breaking (such as removing or renaming a term). This will typically mean a new namespace.
 * The _minor_ number (x.1.x) will increase if a change is non-breaking, but adds new functionality (such as a new term or OWL import)
 * The _patch_ number (x.x.0) will increase if a change is a superficial bug-fix, such as changing typos or avoiding broken links.

Browse the [https://code.google.com/p/pav-ontology/source/browse/#svn%2Ftags SVN tags] for individual patch releases.

== Example of import ==

Please note that the namespace is always http://purl.org/pav/ no matter which version of PAV 2.x is used.

{{{
@prefix owl: <http://www.w3.org/2002/07/owl#> .
@prefix pav: <http://purl.org/pav/> .
<> a owl:Ontology ;
    # Lock down import to minor version 2.2
    owl:imports <http://purl.org/pav/2.2> .
}}}


You may want to *owl:imports* either the namespace, http://purl.org/pav/, to always get the latest version, or a particular (minor or patch) versionIRI, as above, in order to lock down the version. 

_Note that for compatibility reasons, http://purl.org/pav/ returns the OWL as RDF/XML, but with {{{Content-Type: application/xml}}} in order to present a human-readable version (by XSLT) for browsers accessing the namespace URI. Some OWL tools might not accept this media type, in such cases the versionIRI like http://purl.org/pav/2.1 should be used instead, which return the ontology with {{{Content-Type: application/rdf+xml}}}_


The versionIRI stated in the OWL files always return the latest patch version (ie. http://purl.org/pav/2.1 might serve 2.1.2) - the idea being that for most cases you would want patch updates.


== PAV ontology v2.2.0 (2013-08-30) ==

|| *Namespace* || *OWL* || *Documentation* ||
|| http://purl.org/pav/ || http://purl.org/pav/2.2.0 || http://purl.org/pav/2.2.0/html ||

Changes since v2.1.2:
 * DC Terms subproperties introduced:
   * pav:authoredBy subproperty of dcterms:creator        (creation of content)
   * pav:createdBy subproperty of dcterms:creator         (creation of representation)
   * pav:contributedBy subproperty of dcterms:contributor (contribution of content)
   * Avoids OWL import of http://purl.org/dc/terms/ - instead includes property definitions of the above
   * Remaining properties still [http://purl.org/pav/mapping/dcterms mapped to DCTerms in SKOS]
 * Description for date properties like pav:createdOn explain how to form an xsd:dateTime when time is  unknown
 * Descriptions have clarified intended functionality, e.g. [pav:authoredBy http://pav- ontology.googlecode.com/svn/tags/2.2.0/pav.html#d4e149] indicate the *last* authoring date.
 * Examples in descriptions further clarify the distinction between creation of representation and  authoring of content.
 * added owl:isDefinedBy <http://purl.org/pav/> for PAV terms
 * HTML documentation includes hierarchy of referenced PROV and DCTerms superproperties, but not their  labels (making it clear that they are not defined by PAV), see for example [http://pav-ontology.googlecode.com/svn/tags/2.2.0/pav.html#d4e137 prov:wasRevisionOf]

== PAV ontology v2.1.2 (2013-08-16) ==

|| *Namespace* || *OWL* || *Documentation* ||
|| http://purl.org/pav/ || http://purl.org/pav/2.1.2 || http://purl.org/pav/2.1.2/html ||

Changes since v2.1.1:
 * Misspelling in [http://pav-ontology.googlecode.com/svn/tags/2.1.2/pav.html#d4e148 description of pav:createdBy] - dct:createdBy changed to dct:creator


== PAV ontology v2.1.1 (2013-03-26) ==

|| *Namespace* || *OWL* || *Documentation* ||
|| http://purl.org/pav/ || http://purl.org/pav/2.1.1 || http://purl.org/pav/2.1.1/html ||

Changes since v2.1.0:
 * Link to [http://pav-ontology.googlecode.com/svn/tags/2.1.1/images/pav-overview-755px.png overview diagram]
 * Modified descriptions for [http://pav-ontology.googlecode.com/svn/tags/2.1.1/pav.html#http://purl.org/pav/importedFrom pav:importedFrom] to clarify that the translated knowledge does not need to be complete
 * Elaborated pav:createdWith, pav:derivedFrom, pav:importedBy, pav:retrievedBy
 * A [http://www.w3.org/TR/skos-primer/ SKOS] mapping for: [http://purl.org/pav/mapping/dcterms dcterms]; uses  [http://purl.org/pav/mapping/skos PAV in SKOS]. This mapping is also described as a [http://pav-ontology.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/mapping/dcterms-void.ttl VoID dataset].

== PAV ontology v2.1.0 (2013-02-27) ==

|| *Namespace* || *OWL* || *Documentation* ||
|| http://purl.org/pav/ || http://purl.org/pav/2.1.0 || http://purl.org/pav/2.1.0/html ||

Changes since v2.0: 
 * Sub-property mapping to [http://www.w3.org/TR/prov-o/ PROV-O]. Note that PROV-O is not imported by PAV, so you may import <http://www.w3.org/ns/prov#>, for instance to get the inferred domains and ranges from PROV.
 * Includes introduction about PAV ontology
 * Descriptions of properties are elaborated with examples and relationships to each other
 * Backward compatibility with PAV 1.2 terms indicated using owl:equivalentProperty (Note that the ontology itself is owl:incompatibleWith because several PAV 1 properties have changed names or are organized in a flatter hierarchy).
 * pav:curates marked as deprecated, use its inverse pav:curatedBy
 * owl:versionIRI does now does NOT end in a / - this is to avoid confusion between the versionIRI and the namespace (which stays unchanged).
 * [http://purl.org/pav/html HTML representation] of ontology (made using [http://www.essepuntato.it/lode/ LODE])
 * OWL-file includes a little [http://pav-ontology.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/owl2html.xslt XSLT stylesheet] so that accessing http://purl.org/pav/ in a browser will give links to the above HTML documentation
 * The individual URIs in the PAV namespace - like http://purl.org/pav/authoredBy - redirect to the OWL ontology

== PAV ontology v2.0 (2012-04-04) ==

|| *Namespace* || *versionIRI* / *OWL* || *Documentation* ||
|| http://purl.org/pav/ || http://purl.org/pav/2.0/ || http://purl.org/pav/2.0/html ||

 * Initial release independent from SWAN
 * New namespace http://purl.org/pav/
 * Terms removed: acceptedOn, authors, contributors, curators, importedFirstOn, importedLastOn, importedWithId, lastUpdateBy, publishedBy, publishedOn, sourceFirstAccessedOn, submittedBy, submittedOn
 * Terms renamed:  importedFromSource->importedFrom, versionNumber->version
 * Terms added: authoredOn, contributedOn, createdAt, createdWith, curatedOn, curates, derivedFrom, lastRefreshedOn, providedBy, retrievedBy, retrievedFrom, retrievedOn, sourceAccessedBy

Note that during development of PAV 2.0, the ontology was split into three modules (with a common namespace): [http://purl.org/pav/provenance/2.0/ provenance] [http://purl.org/pav/authoring/2.0/ authoring] and [http://pav-ontology.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/pav-versioning.owl versioning] - but these modules were later merged to the single PAV ontology. For backward compatibility, these module versionIRIs now simply import the whole PAV ontology.


== PAV Ontology v1.2 (2009-01-13) ==
|| *Namespace* || *OWL* || *Documentation* ||
|| http://swan.mindinformatics.org/ontologies/1.2/pav/ || http://purl.org/pav/1.2/ || http://purl.org/pav/1.2/html ||

 * PAV module from the [https://code.google.com/p/swan-ontology/ SWAN ontology] 1.2